this is a special report on Watergate
from the bay area Institute my name is
Marty Galan
I haven't here with me in the studio
Peter Scott who's author of a book
called war conspiracy has done an
extensive research into intelligence
operations of the US government France
Sherman who's from the Bay Area
Institute and who he's just completed a
book on American foreign policy and Fran
Watkins who is from KPFA and who is
going to moderate the rest of this
program we're going to talk about
Watergate and try not so much to get
into this whole spaghetti netting of
connections and people who know people
and people who have been connected to
other people in the Justice Department
and the Treasury and the committee to
re-elect the president but try to deal
overall with the kind of crisis that has
emerged within the United States
government due to this whole Watergate
scandal I think that's a good
introduction Marty because it seems to
me that there's sort of two kinds of
analysis going on about the Watergate
thing one form of analysis is who did it
who are these people and who do they
know as you mentioned and I think the
more neglected and probably the more
important aspect of this is who is in
power in Washington and what significant
power ships have we seen as a result of
Watergate possibly that led up to
Watergate or that may relate to
Watergate in some kind of way I'd love
to begin by picking up on the question
whether the Watergate is creating a
crisis or is in response to a crisis and
I think that one way of establishing
perspective on what's happening and who
are the power groups is to put I'd like
to put these put forward the hypothesis
that Watergate is more in response to a
deeper crisis than itself the single
cause that has created all these the
commotion in the papers these days and I
think that a very real crisis has been
created for the US dollar and for the US
economy by the kind of turnaround that
symbolized by
the escalation in indochina although
it's by no means complete that
de-escalation because for four decades
really since world war two America is
being posited on the idea of an
expanding economy and bigger and bigger
share of that was the government pie and
there's always enough pie for everybody
when Nixon came into power he came into
the power into power supported by and
with his Cod recruited from people who
are not really the establishment of this
country but were marginal to the
establishment and in some cases I would
call them marginal people and as long as
we had this expanding economy it was in
the interests of those really in power
in this country to to work with these
people the marginal people recruited for
a bigger defense budget they recruited
for they campaigned for more aggressive
camp US involvement overseas and so on
they had a very direct stake in this
because with in in expanding the economy
they were carving a little share for
themselves but they were also supporting
the sort of defense economy climate
which probably profited the people at
the center even more than these marginal
people let me interrupt you for just a
minute and see if we can nail down who
some of these marginal people are I
assume that you're referring to people
like Bob Haldeman and John Ehrlichman
who had not been directly involved in
politics before they came into power via
the minister yes exactly they're doubly
marginal because they're not really at
the center of the u.s. political system
as it's normally
envisioned and one of the big complaints
is coming from Congress and the question
you hear it in the questions of the
Select Committee is who in the committee
to reelect the president really knew
anything about electoral politics at
best they were media people they were
not people who had ever represented and
who were you know at the at the heart of
the political process in that sense and
then they were also marginal in sense of
the kind of areas they came from the
kind of people they represented and the
committee to re-elect the president
I think frightened a lot of the people
at the center because here was a
committee with an enormous budget nobody
knows how a big
estimated me maybe forty or fifty
million dollars with maybe ten or twenty
million dollars left over after the
election and these people who in many
ways had didn't represent anybody hoped
to be able to perpetuate themselves
because of their control over this
enormous just fantastic
electoral Kitty now we've defined the
marginal people could we talk a little
bit about who you would define as the
principal people as opposed to the
marginal people well I think that I
think the probably general agreement you
know that certainly people like Haldeman
and Ehrlichman perhaps not Mitchell are
our marginal a sense that as Peter said
we're not in the center of the American
political system as is normally
understood now that the in a way the
question you're asking Fran is one that
should be asked after a long searching
consideration because it's sort of tries
to answer the final question of who does
wield a power and and who has the power
wealth and prestige that counts you know
in this in this in this country and
perhaps it might be better if we start
off with perhaps in a somewhat more
factoring the empirical basis and review
some of the known but not very prominent
facts and one that I'd like to just call
listeners attention to is what happened
immediately after the election last year
and that is how everyone's surprised
Nixon called for the resignation of all
top officials in the administration and
something like 2000 resignations were
requested this was considered the most
extraordinary thing it is normal that
ambassadors routinely resigned and that
cabinet officials routinely resign and
so on but it's not normal that's such a
precipitate action be taken which as
most people in Washington observed at
the time was seem to be almost han't
amount to a purge or had the threat of a
purge in it now this gets me to the
point that Peter made and in response to
your first question that is Watergate
the cry
that produced all these things or was a
response to a crisis I certainly agree
with him it was response to a crisis and
I think the action that Nixon took last
last December last November other and
just after the election in calling for
these resignations suddenly seemed to
open up all sorts of power positions the
command posts to power or at least in
theory going to be vacant now you don't
do that normally I mean normal politics
are that you replace people one by one
you accommodate to the interest you
argue it out appointing someone is not
just there giving someone a salary or
even a certain amount of power I mean it
brings one interest group comes in
another interest group comes out so
clearly it was something extraordinary
about that action and what happened as a
result of that action is very
complicated need more extraordinary now
the crisis I think is there I think and
everyone knows it and everyone has
sensed it I mean it has been Vietnam it
has been the monetary situation it has
been the thing the energy crisis and the
jugular vein in the Middle East and all
sorts of other things I mean that crisis
is sensed by virtually everyone in this
country so it it's I think at this point
one can say that clearly what the that
call that remarkable call for 2000
resignations or so right after the
election was indicative the fact that
this new administration having just won
one of the biggest landslide victories
in the history the United States in
which one normally would think that it
could confidently proceed to wisely or
not so wisely but at least in confidence
guide the destiny of the United States
that it was in a state of panic having
secured enormous victories in the state
of panic and begins starts the
beginnings of a purge can I just add to
that I think and another comparable of
element was the posture that Nixon
adopted towards Congress and the virtual
sort of declaration of war on Congress
which became partly worse because of
Watergate but but was aggravated by
other factors as well so I if I were
answering your question I would break it
down into three parts and say that
people establishment people felt
threatened first of all in Congress and
that that which you might call the sort
of the bipartisan back
particularly of the Senate has now
become very jealous of Senate's
privileges and is responding obviously
to to Nixon there were established
institutional people within the
bureaucracy perhaps most visibly in both
the FBI and the CIA where we know that
many of the people in the FBI objected
to the putting in of L Patrick gray by
Nixon and I think quite obviously
contributed to the leaks of information
which led to Gray's downfall similar
thing in the CIA we're putting in
Schlessinger from the outside was a new
thing for the agency they no one knows
all the facts but it seems like Helms
didn't want to leave they posted at the
head of the CIA he was moved out and a
Nixon man was put in and I suspect that
people in the agency are now anti-nixon
for that reason and finally perhaps the
biggest question and I don't presume to
answer it properly here but the the kind
of economic interests who think 20 years
ahead and are really interested in that
sort of the a planned orderly
development of the US economy versus all
these quick buck operators who get a
some kind of fantastic contract in
Vietnam this year even if it's going to
ruin the US economy in the process
that's what I'd call the marginal
economic interests who are looting the
public treasury and a lot of what's
happened in Vietnam is is almost a kind
of looting I think as opposed to the
people who are also used to enriching
themselves at the expense of the
taxpayer through through government but
do it in turn in a long-term they're
they're really interested in seeing the
country stable and people reasonably
happy and so on and people call that
Wall Street if you want a word but I
don't think that's very helpful do you
think that the current the current
crisis ended with the dollar and the
current sort of contraction of American
economic power abroad has sort of
intensified the differences between
these two sorts of groups the center
group and
and the more kind of marginal people not
just in within the government but in
terms of you know the business
connections how did you spoke up very
definitely and I think this goes back we
did 68 we have to remember a very
analogous crisis when Johnson and the
military wanted to put two hundred and
six thousand more men into Vietnam and
this was leaked to the New York Times
and all in the context of a radical
weakening of the US dollar and new
figures about balance-of-payments crisis
and so on and we saw and agon papers
make this quite clear that in early 1968
a delegation of bankers came down from
Wall Street and in effect told Johnson
you can't send two hundred thousand men
to to Vietnam because the country can't
afford it and the response of Johnson to
that it was painful for him and he was
slow to do it but in the end of March he
announced that he would not run for
re-election and he would not send the
200,000 men and meanwhile he recalled
Westmoreland and so on this was clearly
I think a crisis between the bankers at
the center who had to worry about the
economy as a whole and these marginal
people who for various reasons
bureaucratic military economic whatever
wanted desperately to hang on in Vietnam
let's go back to the story I'm hooked in
the first chapter now where the
president gets a large majority in the
election and fires everybody and we're
in a state of panic let's go back to
that now what's the next chapter well
perhaps one can begin the eye I would
submit the many chapters a big book but
this section of the book begins with
Nixon's electoral victory this
particular chapter I mean their earlier
chapters if one looks at the shifts that
occurred in December and I think would
probably go to far afield - to deal with
him there's some remark of personnel
shifts and seemed to be evidence of
struggles I'll just mention one and that
was a position of Kleindienst that the
talk as reflected in the newspapers at
the time was a client needs would not be
confirmed as Attorney General and that
mix would nominate someone else
and Klein Dean's himself is very unsure
I thought he would be nominated but then
Barry Goldwater paid a visit to Nixon
and pleaded for his fellow Arizonian and
then sometime during the midst of this
very intensive bombing I believe it was
early in January that Nixon finally
announced that Kleindienst would be
would be nominated as Attorney General
at that time also number surprising
moves occurred Secretary of Commerce
Peter Peterson would negotiate all the
big trade deals with the Russians
unexpectedly was ousted and the business
pages were full of this Arminius news 90
seem to be from their point of view a
very good and Secretary of Commerce and
of course the most startling thing of
all the the ouster of Helms as director
the CIA who was widely praised as a true
professional and and man you know with
no political unlike I suppose Allen
Dulles or John McCone of ITT fame now so
there were a lot of lesser changes to
that occurred the appointment of William
Clements as deputy secretary of defense
and arguments about that now there's one
thing that occurred around the Clements
thing which I'd like to ask Peter about
because so we have been discussing some
similar things when the the the talk in
December exactly at this time with some
enormous amount of bombing going on was
was going when there was talk about who
should be Deputy Secretary of Defense I
stay the same position that David
Packard had held during the first Nixon
apart during a part of the first Nixon
administration it was reported that
Richardson favored a man named more
leave name was Jonathan Moore who was
reputed to be a dove in Vietnam and
rather liberal and somewhat like
Richardson and his viewers and the
Richardson very much wanted to to have
him as deputy secretary defense and and
the Washington Post item reported rather
curious that some of the sort of more
conservative appearing people like
Charles Colson was already out at that
time practicing law and wash and some
others were lining up with the Liberals
in support of more sort of the old right
and the old left or the old liberals
getting together to support a dove
candidate and
the man who was finally nominated was
the representative of major oil
interests in Texas and exceedingly hard
a hawkish Thai person from one can tell
I was going to ask Peter here that the
phenomenon that appeared at that time
that seems to be reappearing again in
the present Watergate hearings of old
conservatives are old reactionaries you
know what's a sort of FBI oriented
people or or look I
McCourt is I was described by a
right-wing person to me when we happen
to know as a fine operative but people
like that zeroing in on Nixon along with
the old liberals who also know I I
wondered whether you'd kind of well I
think this is the end product of the
whole Nixon strategy of being you know
keeping the power very tightly to
himself in recruiting instead you know
what I think a traditional presidential
strategy is to surround himself by
representative people you know perhaps
overly representative you got to get
somebody from the center Midwest and the
northeastern well you know all that sort
of thing but Nixon recruited
particularly in his White House staff
but but generally he recruited also
particularly and in the Justice
Department from about three areas one of
them was the the leftovers of the old
what used to be called the Arizona mafia
from the Goldwater campaign Klein gangs
rain twist yes well it's a kindest would
be the biggest example now and then
secondly the his law firm in New York
Mitchell and the people that Mitchell
recruited and finally and perhaps most
prominent now were the the Haldeman
people from Jay Walter Thompson that was
Chapin and the people that you know most
of the people that they were in the
White House were recruited by Haldeman
these people were so close and so tight
that the result was it wasn't that it's
so much split the Republican Party but
it it's separated Nixon and his little
gang from the Republican Party and also
obviously from the Democrats so that in
that we can see the phenomenon most
clearly inside Congress
where the the right and the left helped
to stop the gray nomination perhaps the
chief role being played by senator Byrd
who's a right wing Democrat and hoping
in so doing to strengthen his forces and
the Strauss forces inside the Democratic
Party but what's interesting is we see
the same thing outside of you know you
might expect it in Congress because
there it's a fight between Congress and
the presidency but we find the same
thing really happening outside I think
as well that the the Republican National
Committee for example is obviously very
unhappy about the role that is being
taken in recent in this last campaign by
the committee to re-elect the president
and has a direct stake it's a
complicated role they have to play but
they have a very Dec direct stake in
trying to recapture primacy in the
Republican Party for the Republican
National Committee and that's something
again which unites the right-wingers and
the left wingers in the party then
finally you see trying to just to look
at a bit into the future what what I
wonder is what will happen if say the
price of gold goes up to a hundred and
fifty dollars an ounce or something like
that because at a moment like that it
seems to me quite possible the moment
like that I'm sure that the the bankers
and the santur will come back to Nixon
with an ultimatum and I think Nixon has
felt enough of that kind of pressure
already to explain his statement on
Tuesday of this week which was
essentially an attempt to try and
reassure people backing the dollar and
to describe discouraged speculators by
saying clearly I will not resign I think
that was done directly with an eye to
what's happening to gold in the
international markets I think we may
move towards a crisis in this country
where the bankers come to Nixon and say
we can't afford the nation cannot afford
to have you in in office anymore now in
the case of Johnson in 1968 there was
only six months to run in his candidacy
the case of Nixon who I don't think will
give up easily but also I think is is is
really visibly lacking in support it's
like that scene in seven days in May
where they see
a general rowing a boat and they realize
that the conspirators have not got very
many personnel between them when the
general has to roll a boat
well I think we see the same thing in
Washington and Nixon has to move his
clean men like Schlessinger and
Richardson around from post to post
supposed it becomes rather comic but
it's a very clear indication when he
when he fails to recruit packard or any
serious established personality for the
secretary to be Secretary of Defense the
very clear sign that he is without
allies at this point and yet at the same
time he is that they he is the chief of
state it's a very very paradoxical I
know I think dangerous situation I think
it is I mean obviously is dangerous I
mean with an item that Marty pointed out
to me in the Wall Street Journal the
other day in the first hints of a
possible recession I mean we've had
inflation for a long time and
unemployment is going down somewhat but
still not satisfactory but there's been
this boom woman and bond in Cambodia
will not let solve any economic now but
one difference it seems to me Peter
between 68 and now is that in 68 March
1968 but the issue was to have Johnston
do nothing and therefore he has
committed political suicide a good point
yes
where's now the issue is had the
president do something we need it strong
we need a strong president because doing
nothing now means the whole thing just
goes over the side and flows into the
abyss wonder if I could make an analogy
when it says I interests me more and
more in the last year between the way in
which Indochina corrupted the politics
of the fourth republic in France in the
1950s and became sort of the one stable
thing in the fourth Republic was the
Indochina war just went on and on and on
and couldn't be stopped and there was so
much corruption around it that it
succeeded in corrupting not only
officials and into China but officials
in Paris and ultimately they the
assembly itself and that same corruption
surviving almost without break into the
late 50s and 60s and now corrupting
America America as well in American
politics so that although we go from
Democrats to Republicans the ones sort
of stable thing in American
politics has been some kind of US
presence in Indochina which is clearly
unpopular which is now even unpopular
with Congress as well as with the people
and yet is something that the Nixon
administration seems to be indelibly
committed to in particular these
marginal people that he has brought
around him they they don't like to be
ideologically prominent you know it's
not easy to pin a label on people like
Haldeman and Ehrlichman but clearly it's
people like them over being at they it
is being their power
certainly not Congress's power which has
been responsible for these sudden
escalations like the one you talked
about last December and the reason that
that analogy concerns me so much is that
really the only way out for France from
the the mess of first Indochina and
ultimately Algeria was a kind of
conspiracy of the center which dump
which dumped both they corrupted
politicians of the Fourth Republic or
the worst of them and also some of the
ultras who were trying to push always
for more and more commitments to to
Algeria so that everyone felt that the
goal had betrayed them in that but in a
sense it was a conspiracy to restore him
try to assassinate him six times yes yes
yes it was not an easy thing at all
well I just wonder if what we aren't
moving into a kind of comparable period
a kind of degradation of leadership as
we saw in France so that somebody like
PA and France is comparable to something
like Agnew in power today is a vice
president he's not really a
representative man I think certainly not
representative the powers in this
country I'm just very concerned that so
far there has been no talk of violence
of any kind or force in response to this
situation and as long as it as long as
the country remains more or less on on
balance there is no real sudden threat
to the to the economy or to the
the dollar minor monetary or economic
then I think we can solve this problem
but but we know that there are all kinds
of dangerous signals on both levels both
the actual fate of the dollar and also
the fate of the economy the threat of
recession is some people have compared
1973 to 1929 you know more and more
corporate profits but less and less
faith in in the economic future for this
country increasing scandal as well no
[Music]
we've talked about the need now as far
as the economy is concerned and
institutional investors and big business
for a strong president to do something
now how in the world can we come from
the state that we're in now with the
president who's powerless and totally
paralyzed and with the staff that's
absolutely not functioning the
government is not going on as usual in
Washington now we're at this point of
crisis as far as the economy and the our
whole position with the rest of the
world is concerned so how do you get out
of it I don't think there's any hope
with President Nixon because we have
seen I think it's it's just clear that
when Nixon does something in the
economic area he does the wrong thing
I'm in Phase two which looked like
controls was control of labor control of
wages some kind of control of prices the
interest of maximizing profits but we
have this colossal balance-of-payments
problem right now and what moves most
easily out of the country what
encourages the fight of capital out of
this country is to maximize profits is
precisely profits that are mobile and as
profits which have been flying out of
this country and that's an aspect of the
whole economic crisis which no one seems
to talk about although I hear all kinds
of people who who are engaged in this
kind of withdrawal of the food dollars
from this country say of course controls
will have to come it can't go on like
this that's why I talk about a kind of
looting of this country which is very
analogous to France in the 50s it's you
could even I mean this is Pat's
exaggerating but it's not totally and
comparable to say China in the 1930s
it's kind of systemic degradation of
part
at the center which is allowed for such
powerful private enrichment that it
reinforces the power at the center even
though the society as a whole is is
steering into worse more stronger that
there's an enormous flight of capital
out of this country it's clear I mean
people are talking about a hundred
billion dollars in liquidity which 93%
is owned by American multinational
corporations and the other 7% supposedly
by Arabs whatever oil interests they
seem to be the bad boys in this whole in
this whole situation but obviously the
the that's it's much more profitable and
lucrative and to transform dollars and
to turn dollars into into mark and yen I
whatever happens I mean it may be Nixon
will be a Hoover or a second term
Eisenhower and and and in the face of
all these challenges not be able to do
very much but I don't think that this
country has faced a general crisis such
as it began to face in 1929 I mean who
knows what's gonna happen but general
cries a lot of problems all come
together you know and major problems
affecting the country as a whole that
that that this has not happened since
1929 but at the same time
leaving aside Watergate leaving aside
Nixon and looking simply at the kind of
institutional changes that occurred at
the top level of government they have
been moves toward a presidential
dictatorship that the power of the
presidency has been systematically built
up to with unbelievable proportions we
must be fair and say this has been a
cumulative process since 90s one thing
that seems to characterize this crisis
though is that Nixon himself seems to
lack the ability to smoothly and
harmoniously represent the interests of
the American ruling class as a whole
represent their general interests he
always seems to be in a quandary
to the extent that that tea is bending
over backwards to help some of these
these marginal kinds of businesses and
interests which you mentioned Peter or
in some cases you know specific
corporations it's the ITT affair
revealed and to do it in such a way that
that damages his ability to represent
the kind of general interests of the
American business oligarchy and one
thing I was wondering maybe we could
just deal a bit with some of these kind
of marginal or specific interests that
that Nixon bends over backwards to help
it and in particular those who that
which seem to have been somewhat
implicated in the whole Watergate affair
and which I guess is really mainly
Nixon's dealings with people various
people in Florida who have been
associated with the Mafia you know
something about this people do you not
let me go back and see if we began this
whole discussion with the idea of the
Watergate scandal being a response to a
crisis so as we talked about this let's
see if we can go back to the original
question and say specifically how
Watergate has been a response to this
crisis which is certainly worsened as a
result of Watergate well what I've been
trying to suggest is that there are
people in Congress in the bureaucracy
and in shall we say Wall Street in the
sort of economic establishment who are
very interested in weakening the power
of the president this time and
particularly in separating the president
from certain kinds of people and
ironically these I think these have
proven now to be the people that are
hardest to separate the president from
the bebe rebozo is an example obviously
I mean a lot of editorials that have
from particularly East Coast papers that
have establishment papers have suggested
that it's not appropriate for the
president to spend nearly all of his
free time with a man who was accused of
making a fortune out of back marketing
in World War two is visibly being
involved in business deals with
convicted with criminals including one
man who in 1964 was called one of the
top syndicate figures in the United
States whose bebe rebozo repeatedly does
direct business dealings with there is
there's a dark side to Richard Nixon and
saying it's the only side to him but the
Nixons
own personal investments of being in
miami real estate and have been involved
robo so has usually been a principal in
this and i think it's no accident at all
that this little real-estate company
called emeritus which was suspected at
the beginning as being a front for the
watergate operation it was operated by
Eugenio Martinez who was one of the
people actually arrested inside the
Watergate and across Nixon's connections
with the Cuban exiles as a whole second
story but I'm just talking about his
personal business deals Eugenio Martinez
is supposed to formerly being a vice
president of Keyes Realty which is among
other things the firm which handled a
succession of very shady business
operations in land deals some of which
are now owned some of that land now
owned by rebozo and Nixon and Nixon
seems to have delayed registration of
his Lots precisely because he knew of
the sort of shady background of this and
no one couldn't go on for four hours
about Keyes Realty but say only that
didn't the Kefauver hearings back in
nineteen fifty this company was named
along with its lawyers as being
principals and providing the payoffs to
the corrupt Sharia sheriff of Dade
County might that's to say Miami Florida
which explained why Miami was such a
center for gambling and other criminal
activities in that time I think we have
to go back though and establish specific
incidents if we can now why was the
President or the committee to re-elect
the president certainly we know involved
in all this business of political
espionage and spying on Democrats and
building up a system of the listen power
let's take the ITN T example it was one
of the things that turned out well I'm
sorry to get back into the name
spaghetti but it really is incredible
isn't it that Dean had EE Howard hunt go
out and speak to DITA beard at a time
when there was all a controversy about
the DJ beard memorandum in the I T and T
case and apparently they did this
because of the fact that a that the d de
beard memorandum
being given to the FBI on the explicit
instructions that was not to go any
further in that that L Patrick gray had
a hand it was the man who had received
the memorandum and and it said yes it
won't go any further and the next thing
we know he Howard hunt is going out to
to speak to D de beard about it before
it was was common knowledge all those
deals we can't obviously don't have time
to list the diesels but in sort of these
trade offs where the government eases
through something for any kind of
private interest the response of which
is a private payment to private funds to
reelect the president you have a kind of
self a self maintaining power system
there which is independent from and
alien to the whole sort of anticipated
congressional bureaucratic relationships
I think the campaign chest and the
campaign donations is a much more
obvious thing and easier to understand
let's go back to the Watergate incident
itself do we have any basis here for
answering the question of why was the
Democratic National Committee
headquarters broken into in the first
place I think and why was it so badly
bungled and then can we go from there
well I'll it's only else answer
depending I just want to make a
clarification when I say we have a
Watergate crisis in response to an other
crisis I don't regard the breaking into
the water great as the thing that caused
the Watergate crisis I think if we had a
different economic and political
situation in the first part of this year
you would never again have heard about
the Watergate break-in we have to
distinguish between the break-in which
is not unprecedented in this country
from the way in which the nation has
responded to that break-in which is I
think I'm pleased well I think we have
to go back and say that if McCord had
never written his letter to judge Sarika
that we never would have heard any more
about the Watergate thing but I think
we're done at Rick gray nomination and
gone through Congress yes yes that's
true I'm perfectly prepared to accept
that part of the thesis the the place I
think where it gets muddy is why did
McCord write as low
- judge Sarika how did it happen that
these people were caught and because
after all the thing was very badly
bungled with the tape on the doors if
these people are actually very fine
operatives as you quoted earlier front
how did this kind of thing happen mr.
Lewis Savage said if he was going to
send a wire man in there he wouldn't
send him in with an army I think that's
very true then it's either the
Republicans have said from the very
beginning that there must have been a
double agent in that team and I find it
very hard not to agree with that well
then how does that fit into what we've
talked about well maybe the answer to to
this question lies with that agency of
government which apparently can be
secret no matter what it does the CIA
because that has been and insert to some
extent the the kind of dark character in
this whole operation because all these
people hunt Liddy McCord Barker even
though they work years for the CIA claim
the CIA has it has had nothing to do
with this directly I mean they have
repudiated any any link between the
creep Nixon's campaign organization and
Nixon's activities and the CIA even when
they supposedly brought up this whole
issue of the intervention - to try to
blame the whole caper on the CIA maybe
that's where the the factor of the
double agent lies well I think it's a
bit early to speculate but but some of
the symptoms about the break-in is take
one for example if if an ordinary police
car had come to respond to that break-in
they they wouldn't have been caught
because they were watching for the
police but there was some kind of
incredible accident the local police car
was getting being gassed up in that
moment so you send in an unmarked car
which means these sort of special squads
which every police force has an are the
local sort of there's a very close it's
they're all they're like local CIA's
they have their own special operations
their own special intelligence and it
was those people who went in so they
weren't observed quite a lot of
questioning about the
and it turns out we learned from the
from the urban committee that these
people actually went in after hours that
the this unmarked car was supposed to
have gone off at midnight but for some
reason is what was the testimony that
there'd been a lot of break-ins around
there recently and they'd found that
they scored better on these break-ins
sometimes if they put in overtime so
that night they they happen to put in
some overtime and they they happen to to
turn up is it's I don't know that week
we I'd I personally would feel better
waiting for a bit more of the evidence
to come in but that that there's more to
this whole thing than meets the eye I
think almost any any observer would
concede at this point wouldn't they I
mean it isn't just a case of somebody
trying to get into a room and then and
and getting caught at it I mean that I
think that's been more or less sort of
understood from the very beginning that
there is a major factional fight and
action out of the small sense I mean a
probably very broad interests are
ultimately involved in this thing but
the kind of factional struggle that's
going on and it is still going on now
the other hand I think people should be
aware of the fact that at some point the
issue may be resolved that's to say that
that clearly the country can't stand
still and that that at some point the
losers will be the real losers and I
think there are real losers in this I
think they're fighting back desperately
I think the old FBI is a loser
fighting back desperately I think the
old some of the old CIA types are losers
lots of losers and no one's clearly I
think the winners are but at some point
as an old factional struggles the lines
will become clearer you know who the
losers and who the winners are I think
that's what people kind of should sort
of watch for because at that point I
would suspect that Watergate might
suddenly and terminate very rapidly or
if I could make another analogy I think
this is the biggest investigation that's
been going on in Washington since the
Bobby Baker investigation and the tf-x
general dynamics investigation in 1963
both of which were coming to a head well
disappear next
pretty much when Kennedy was
assassinated they had a meeting on
November 20th 1963 and the newspapers
reported that Fred Korth would be the
next witness when the committee
reconvened the next week which would
have been November 27th 1963 I didn't
check my dates on this but I think in
fact the next tf-x committee hearing was
in 1967 or something like that when they
had really and course needless to say
never it was called as a witness at all
except that was those were business
scandals and this is much more like a
constitutional crisis
but I think the Bobby Baker hearing if
it had continued in the direction it was
starting to go in would have reached not
in only into government but into the the
same areas of government and maybe even
some of the same personnel one of the
things that we haven't yet heard from
the Ervin committee which was very
prominent in the initial investigations
was the role of the people who paid for
all this sort of thing the role of the
banks the role of they that they where
did all those $100 bills come from
initially and thank God for the General
Accounting Office which came in with a
very good report which traced these
funds through Bernhard Barker's bank
account which incidentally was in a bank
which is some of the original directors
of which are some of the top political
manipulators in the country back to
another Bank you can trace interlocks
through all of this thing and that
that's where I hope that the Ervin
committee will end up with they've
started at the very bottom you know with
the people who were in the in that DNC
room that particular night I hope they
will go the same route that the GAO did
and travel back through the people who
collected the funds to the top money man
apparently Maurice Stan's for example to
all their got there they're supposed to
that's on their list and finally think
about the role of the these people who
have paid the money to people like
Stan's because I think they are a
discernible element in American politics
and are well worthy of study and that's
why I was so sorry about the Patinkin
I think have a you know the House
Committee on banking and currency they
have a very good record in this they had
already investigated the bank they had
put in connection with the collapse of
the Penn Central they had put out a
report which actually named the bank as
one of the banks which was associated
with this purchase of a cashier's check
down in Florida which ended up in
Burnett Barker's bank account the Patman
committee remember failed to vote to go
ahead with a full investigation in part
at that time because the Watergate case
had not yet come to trial and they said
it would prejudice the chances of the
defendants now there's the the field is
being preempted by the Ervin committee
and I have no reason to doubt yet that
the Previn committee will do a good job
and I think as everyone who's listening
to this broadcast is interested in
things should should just keep track and
make sure that they cover all of the
kind of shady areas which had come out
in the initial investigation six months
ago because certainly not enough to just
diddle around with the conflicting
testimonies of McCord and old
I think Fran said it very well before we
began to tape this program he said that
at this point we are dealing with a
jigsaw puzzle that has a hundred pieces
we've only been given three pieces so
far and none of our three pieces fit
together so let me end by asking you if
basically how serious you believe the
governmental crisis actually is do you
think that we will continue to get
pieces of this puzzle and come back
together over the airwaves of KPFA and
continue to put it together or do you
think that something very serious and
very critical could happen that would
divert us from putting together this
puzzle well let me say a few things here
I think that there I mean in the history
of the recent history of this country
crisis periods have been one where
everything is closed up like decisions
to go into Vietnam and decisions are
going to Korea and so on that things
happen very rapidly but also under
closed doors now this this is one time
when a crisis
has opened the doors for a very brief
period into the labyrinth of government
the normal tendencies for those doors
are closed again and those doors will
close in my estimation
once the some issue has been decided but
the struggle is so intense now I think
there's a real conflict the real
powerful conflict that then we can gain
insights it's like during a surgical
operation for a while you can see how
the innards operate but then sewn up
again and then it's harder to do that
unless you open it up again and you know
cut open people you know every 24 hours
so my feeling would be that one should
you know as that to utilize these
moments when truth comes out you know as
much as possible and you know learn what
one can I mean the idea that somehow the
truth will be presented before the
people or the truth will come out and I
think it's not never happens anywhere
and under any circumstances truth only
only comes out at crisis periods as it
is coming out in this fashion so that in
a way the record of what's already
coming out is very rich I think a lot of
the testimony has little phrases and
innuendos that that are useful and must
be used because that's all we're gonna
get we're not going to get much more and
we got the Pentagon Papers then Peter
and I both have done some work on it and
the you know that it's certainly not
something you read as you know the
spoken word of God the Father Almighty
and what what everything is about
so I thought that would be my feeling
that that um this is the case the other
thing of course is that the question
that I've heard people say as well what
should the position of the Left be at me
so it people who are you know in
opposition and so on well I don't see
that there's any possible position that
one can take because the wolves are
fighting amongst each other or let's say
one tribe of wolves and where the other
tribe and anyway they're fighting
amongst each other it's it's a it's a
drama in which the the contradictions
within the ruling elements have reached
explosive and bloody proportions IIIi
think I don't think the struggle is over
by far but in a way it's a struggle that
will affect all this but yet that
neither the left nor even the Liberals
in
the center I mean the old-fashioned
Center they have a very great part and
somehow happening within the the the
ruling interests and they're their
representatives and in in the structures
of power I'd like to answer your
question by a distinction again between
the two two kinds of crisis I think the
the surface crisis of Watergate might be
turned off as dramatically as it was
turned on that could happen the
underlying economic crisis which I would
call a crisis of retrenchment what
happens to a country and the economy is
being expanded which has been expanding
since it began practically for centuries
it's now suddenly has two stable itself
to stabilize itself and particularly in
the overseas area actually to undergo a
certain kind of retrenchment of
operations that is a very real crisis
one which I don't think we've yet really
begun to face one which for the the
marginal groups I was talking about the
the the quick buck operators the people
who are trying to get a rich contract
out of the Defense Department budget
this year even if it contributes to the
bankruptcy of the whole country five
years from now those people far from
being damped down by anything happened
up to the present I think they're more
active and more dangerous than ever the
kind of operation which is symbolized by
iOS and first burnett Kornfeld and then
later
vesko that's that kind of quick buck
operation represents i think a very
dangerous for us so all the people who
grown fat on the defense budget and
don't know what to do when the defense
budget is cut back I think that's a very
real crisis and will continue regardless
of what happens to Watergate well our
time is just about up I'd like to thank
Peter for being with us and Fran also
and Franz as well and this is Marty
Yellin from the bay area Institute this
program was distributed by the Pacifica
program service in Berkeley all rights
are reserved